---
layout: post
title: Walt Disney's Four Keys (of Software Development)
date: '2020-06-15'
author: Michael D. Callaghan
tags: 
- Careers
- Development
- Business
layout: post
feature: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/four-keys.png
thumbnail: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/four-keys.png
cover_image: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/four-keys.png
canonical_url: https://walkingriver.com/four-keys
published: false
---


<!--more-->

# Background

I recently celebrated nine years as a [software developer at Walt Disney World in Florida](https://walkingriver.com/magical-job). It is the longest I have ever stayed with a single company in my nearly 30-year software development career. Not coincidentally, it has also been one of my most rewarding. 

# Guest Service Basics

In case you are wondering, none of this is secret or confidential information. The company has made much of this information public. If you are interested in learning more about Walt's theories of Guest relations, take a look at [Be Our Guest](https://www.amazon.com/Be-Our-Guest-Perfecting-Institute/dp/1423145844/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&linkCode=ll1&tag=walkingriver-20&linkId=234946f84949a42451f1cd3973527d73&language=en_US), a book by The Disney Institute.

# Walt's Four Keys Basics 
Soon after being hired at Walt Disney World (and I presume other Disney Parks), each new "Cast Member" is sent to a class known as "Traditions," a half- or all-day course introducing the attendee to the basics of Guest Service, company history and culture, and a few surprises. It does not matter if the individual is a new executive or a College Program participant, everyone takes Traditions. 

I attended Traditions on May 10, 2011, and it was where I first learned about "Walt Disney's Four Keys Basics." Briefly, the four keys are as follows:

- Safety
- Courtesy
- Show
- Efficiency

The order they are presented is important, as each one supersedes the ones that come after. In other words, safety is the most important key. Below are some 

## Safety
> I practice safe behaviors in everything I do.

Guest and Cast safety come before everything else. To illustrate, I was at Epcot with my family one night. We were waiting for the start of Illuminations: Reflections of Earth. If you have never seen it, Illuminations featured fireworks, fire, water, and lasers, all set to a powerful symphonic score. The show was presented primarily in the center of World Showcase Lagoon, which means it is visible all around Epcot's World Showcase. Unlike most fireworks shows, much of the show took place low to the water. This meant that the "best" viewing spots were right against the railing. Sometimes there were Guests who decided that the railing was not quite close enough.

On this particular night, a young couple decided they needed to cross the railing and get closer. I think they simply wanted to get a cool picture of themselves in front of the lagoon. What they apparently did not know was that Illuminations features perimeter fireworks, and one of the launch tubes were right next to where they decided to stand. Before I could get their attention and warn them, some Epcot security personnel appeared seemingly out of nowhere to get them out of harm's way. 

I have seen similar concerns for safety with around broken glass, spilled food, and other "accidents." I have never witnessed a Cast Member put safety aside for any reason.

## Courtesy
> I go above and beyond to exceed Guest expectations.

The next most important key is Courtesy. As long as safety is not compromised, Disney Cast Members will do everything in their power to make every Guest feel like a VIP. This is not an abstract concept. You may have heard of the "Disney point." Cast Members are taught that pointing with the index finger is considered rude in some cultures. Rather than worrying about who might be offended, we are instructed to point with two fingers or all five. Cast are also taught to speak to children at their level. You will often see Cast Members crouching down to speak to children eye to eye. They often refer to child Guests as "prince" or "princess." If you are visiting as a Guest and are wearing a button displaying a birthday, anniversary, wedding, or other celebration, most Cast Members will go out of their way to comment on it and congratulate you.

Courtesy extends to more than this, however. Disney Cast are empowered to help make things right when things go wrong. This empowerment goes beyond the Cast Members you encounter in the Parks. One night I was at Disney's Boardwalk Resort, waiting to meet another Cast Member for dinner. While standing on the boardwalk, overlooking Crescent Lake, I suddenly heard what was clearly an exclamation of frustration. Turning to look, I saw a young family who had just left the ice cream parlor. One of the children had dropped his ice cream cone and was on the verge of tears. I am not an operations Cast Member, but I too am empowered to help wherever I can. I went over to them and introduced myself to the mother, and offered to help them replace the ice cream. I went into the ice cream parlor, explained the situation, and got a replacement. As I returned to the family, the mother thanked me profusely and then proceeded to tell me how that little action had made their day. 

Other examples of courtesy can be seen anytime a Guest receives a "Magical Moment." These are usually minor surprises, and I love being part of them. I have seen Guests surprised with free snack, Fast Passes, fireworks viewing upgrades, and more. One of my favorites is the "Parade Marshall" family, selected from the day's park Guests to ride in the front vehicle of the daily parade. If you have ever been the recipient of a Magical Moment, you know how special they can be.

## Show 
> I ensure my area is show-ready at all times.

"Show-ready" implies that the parks, resorts, attractions, restaurants, and everything else are always ready for Guests to experience and enjoy. Appearances, deocrations, and theming should be internally consistent. You may be familiar with the story of Walt Disney seeing a cowboy walking through Tommorrowland in Disneyland Park. That jarring juxtaposition is an example not being show-ready. 

Cast Members can ensure that an attraction is show-ready by keeping their areas free of distracting clutter. They will immediately report any maintenance issues, and take action to correct issues where appropriate. 

## Efficiency
> I perform my role efficiently so Guests get the most out of their visit.

Disney Parks are always looking for ways to make the Guest experience more efficient. This has led to such innovations as FastPass+, Mobile Ordering, Memory Maker, and Magic Bands.

# Applying the Four Keys to Software Development
Naturally, Walt did not have software development in mind when he talked about the four keys. However, I am not an Operations Cast Member. I do not often work with Guests. I do not work in the parks, except for an occasional volunteer shift around Christmas and Easter. Because of that, it was not clear to me how I could leverage the Four Keys in my day-to-day role. As a member of a team known as the "Delivery Center of Excellence," this felt like an oversight. Our job was, as one manager put it, to be the conscience of the software delivery organizations. 

I took it upon myself to try to align some principles and practices to those four keys and come up with my own list. I share this list with you, with a warning that it is by no means exhaustive. 

## Safety
> I keep on top of and implement current secure coding practices.

Secure coding practices, PCI, PII, TLS

## Courtesy 
> Every coding decision I make is made with the end-user in mind.

SSO, Don't make the user do things twice. Smart caching, internationalization, accessibility.

## Show 
> I keep the user experience at the forefront of my application design.

Many years ago I was on a telephony system modernization project for the United States Senate. I had inherited the project when I joined the company. One of the application's features was the bulk upload of phone numbers and their physical locations into its database. The user experience for changing a single field was to download a file from the app's server, edit the record in Excel, and then upload the entire file back to the server. I am not sure who thought this was a good UX, but it worked, and most customers never complained. At least not until we installed the system at the US Senate.

The problem was one of scale. Most of our customers had a 500 - 2000 phones. The Senate had over 35,000! Let us ignore the question of why a governmental body of 100 members needs 35,000 phone numbers. The fact is that they have that many. Making a change to a single record required the steps I outline above. It was during this project that we finally got around to providing a browser-based edit page, where the user can search for and edit records one at a time if desired. There was one other problem, but I will leave that story to the next section.

As you work on your own applications, try to consider all aspects of the app's design and functionality from your users' perspective. Use common UI components, where possible. Unless you have a lot of good research in user experience, try not to create new UI paradigms. Adhere to the [Principle of Least Surprise](http://principles-wiki.net/principles:principle_of_least_surprise). Buttons should look like buttons. Components that look like links should behave like links. 

## Efficiency
> I use my time, my team's time, and the company's resources wisely.

Continuing my US Senate story, the reason we finally provided a web page to edit individual records is because uploading their 35,000 records took our system more than three hours to process! The or

This is the last key, but too often developers put it first. How often have you been on a project that had dead code for the simple reason

YAGNI, AHA, DRY, SOLID

# 

# Want to See More?
Would you like to see more content like this? At the urging of some of my more vocal fans, I am considering writing a book on business communications, taken from my nearly three decades as a software developer. I have made and overcome a lot of mistakes, and am eager to share them with you. You may have seen some of this content before, specifically my blogs posts on [spelling and grammar](https://walkingriver.com/watch-your-language/) and my recently shared experience on [almost committing perjury](https://walkingriver.com/perjury). 

Here is my proposal. If I can get at least 25 people willing to preorder such a book, then I will write it. For more information, please see my [Gumroad Page here](https://gumroad.com/walkingriver).
