---
layout: post
title: Using .NET Almost Got Me Fired
date: '2020-06-01'
author: Michael Callaghan
tags: 
- Careers
- Disney
- Software
layout: post
feature: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/dotnet.jpeg
thumbnail: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/dotnet.jpeg
cover_image: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/dotnet.jpeg
canonical_url: https://walkingriver.com/net-fired
published: false
---

In 2005, the .NET Framework had its 1.1 SP1 release and was relatively stable. Visual Studio .NET 2003 was a solid release. C# was being widely adopted throughout the industry. Selecting it for a project almost got me fired.

<!--more-->

# Compaq ActiveAnswers

This was 15 years ago, so I feel comfortable discussing it now. I was working at Hewlett-Packard in Nashua, New Hampshire, USA. HP had recently merged with Compaq, and absorbed the office and personnel that were once Compaq, and Digital Equipment Corp. before that. Our project was called ActiveAnswers, a CMS that existed before the term CMS was coined. 

When I joined Compaq in 1999, ActiveAnswers was a set of HTML templates and text files that were converted into a massive static web site every night. During the day, content editors would make changes by editing the text files. The site used dozens of Perl scripts to combine the content from the text files with the HTML templates. 

By the time of the merger with HP in September, 2001, my team of five people had completely written the application into a mostly WYSIWYG UI that permitted the content editors to make changes directly in a web browser, seeing the results almost immediately. All of the content was stored in a SQL Server database. The front end code was written in VB 6, and was starting to feel a little overweight.

We had adopted many of the practices of the new release eXtreme Programming methodology. The project had automated unit tests and daily (if not continuous) builds. We even built a pair-programming lab. I wish I still had pictures, because doing that in 1999 was a sight to behold.

After the merger, the team and project experienced some significant growing pains. Executives at HP had seen ActiveAnswers and wanted to expand its reach. They wanted to ensure the team could handle the additional workload. 

All of the contractors on the team were made a similar offer: accept a full-time job with HP at a reduced pay rate, or be replaced. A few of us chose to remain. One colleague in particular, who was instrumental in designing and building the application's UI chose to leave. He was immediately replaced with two contractors who combined were far less effective than he was.

# Outgrowing Visual Basic
Over the next few years, our team of five grew to 20. Four times the size does not equate to four times the productivity. In many ways, we seemed to be much less effective. We struggled to keep up with the  business requirements. Feature after feature were requested. New users and new content were added, putting a strain on an architecture that had been built for fewer than a dozen users. Training demands increased. The venerable VB6 was showing its age. It was time for something new.

The company provided all of its developers with an MSDN Subscription, and a few us were excited by the release of Visual Studio .NET 2003. Windows XP was new, and the two seemed to work flawlessly together. We decided to start experimenting with .NET and C# to see whether we could provide the users with the features and the performance they needed.

# Initial Resistance
At first, the idea of switching to a newer technology was met with mild curiosity. The leadership authorized a proof of concept. "Go do something and then show the rest of the team." It was not long, however, before the resistance began. Some of the contractors had used .NET before, but most had not. Who would train them? Would they need to be replaced? All good questions, for which I had no good answers.

# Turning the "Money Crank"

# Fateful Decision
We were having a particularly difficult problem with one of our application components. VB simply did not have the language facilities to deal with this particular issue without massive brute-force coding. C#, on the other hand, had a very straightforward way to solve the problem.

I finally made the decision to implement that particular component in C#. The solution was everything I had hoped it would be: short, elegant, and easy to understand. 

At this point in the story, I wish I still had the source code that I could share. However, [I learned the hard way not to keep source code when leaving a company](https://walkingriver.com/perjury).

# The Phone Call
We had a policy on our team that each new feature would be revealed on a team-wide NetMeeting conference, attended by anyone interested. The primary developer on the feature would explain it, show the passing unit tests, demonstrate the feature, and then answer questions from the rest of the team.  We had these meetings a few times per week, as I recall. 

This call was my time to shine, or so I imagined. I went through all of the normal steps, and all was going well. There were three critical things about this particular call that will soon become apparent:

1. My manager was in attendance.
2. The VP of Software Engineering was in attendance.
3. I had initiated the call.

I completed my demonstration and was feeling pretty good. Everyone agreed that the functionality was correct and what the business needed. 

During the Q&A, most of my peers wanted to see the code. I was happy to oblige, excited to be able to have concrete proof that C# was a good fit for our project. I was finally excited again by the project and eager to help the rest of the team adopt .NET where appropriate for future features.


# My Probation

# Conclusion

