---
layout: post
title: Why I Work at Disney, Part 2
date: '2020-07-15'
author: Michael D. Callaghan
tags: 
- Careers
- Software
- Disney
feature: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/xxx.png
thumbnail: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/xxx.png
cover_image: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/xxx.png
canonical_url: https://walkingriver.com/why-disney-2
published: false
---


<!--more-->

# Background

# Career Benefits

Of course, working at Disney is more than fun and games. There are many career benefits available to everyone at all levels of the operation.

## Work-Life Balance
Most companies go out of their way to say how important work-life balance it. I have never worked for a company as committed to the reality as Disney. 

I was on a call with our Vice President recently and the subject came up that many people were accruing too much vacation time. At the time of this writing, we are still dealing with COVID-19. With everything there is to do, it seems that few people want to take time off. We asked what should be done about it. The answer was simple: Take your vacation. The work will still be here when you get back.

In my nearly ten years here, no one has ever been asked to sacrifice home or family life for work. 

## Interesting Project Potential

With so much happening, the potential for working on interesting projects is practically unlimited. I have personally been involved with projects of the following nature:

- Cast-facing resort and dining reservations systems.
- Reservations and Guest systems for Disney Vacation Club.
- New transportation hardware and software systems.
- Mobile device project for Disney's Magical Express.
- Sales systems for travel agents.
- Resort Motorcoach arrival time signage.

There is enough going on at any given time that there is usually some way

## Unparalleled Growth Opportunities

You may have heard of [George Kalogridis](https://dpep.disney.com/leaders/george-kalogridis/), who recently stepped down as president of the Walt Disney World Resort. From his bio page just referenced...

>In September of 1971, at age 17, George began his Disney Parks career as a busboy at Disney’s Contemporary Resort, helping to open Walt Disney World.

George's career had a humble beginning, yet he climbed the ladder to become the president of the entire resort. Few other companies can compare to this type of growth potential.

Lest you think this is some kind of fluke, let me tell you about one of my first coworkers. He began with Disney more than 25 years ago as a Cast Member in Housekeeping, making beds. Because he could type and was familiar with Microsoft Excel, his manager recruited him to help set up a shift scheduling spreadsheet. This led to an appreciation for software. He took some classes and learned software development. Today he is a Lead Solutions Architect with the company.

## Approachable Leadership

There are plenty of stories of Walt himself walking through Disneyland Park, greeting Guests and Cast Members. One story describes Walt meeting a custodial Cast Member in Town Square, who proceeded to refer to him as "Mr. Disney." Walt immediately corrected the young man. "Walt, son. Call me Walt." More than 60 years later that attitude continues. Every Cast Member is free to call another by his/her first name, regardless of the relative differences in their roles. We all even wear name tags displaying our first names and home towns, from the newest College Program participant just "earning my ears" to the CEO.

Most executives in the organization are extremely approachable and friendly. I have never felt any discomfort in sticking my head in an open door and asking our Director or Vice President, "do you have a few moments?" Usually the answer is yes. If not, a quick email will always be returned. 

I just double checked and there are exactly seven people between me and the CEO of The Walt Disney Company. That may seem like a lot at first glance, but I can say with confidence that six of them know me personally, and I have met privately with each of them at least once. At one time I could claim having met with all seven, but Meg Crofton retired a few years ago and I have not met any of her replacements.

## College Internships
Disney has one of the greatest internship programs I have ever seen. 

## Training Opportunities


## Disney Aspire

# Are There Downsides?
Of course, things are not always perfect and blissful. Sometimes even a magical job with Disney is just another job. Sometimes it can be less than magical. But even then, I would rather have a bad day here than anywhere else. Even when things are bad, the people at Disney have a way of helping to find the silver lining in the cloud. 

A few years ago, I returned from a vacation to find that I had been transferred to a different team under the same manager. Our entire organization had undergone a major transformation during my absence. My former team had been dissolved. I returned to the news that I would henceforth be a Solutions Architect. The trouble was I had no idea what that meant. I was a software developer (programmer, engineer, call it what you want). I express myself best through code, and that is where I was happy.

 As I learned more about the role of a Solutions Architect, it became quickly apparently that architecture is not my thing. As I said, I express myself through code, not architectural diagrams. 
 
 Fortunately, my manager recognized this and went out of his way to provide opportunities for me to work on projects that accentuated my strengths. At the same time, he and his manager both tried to help me improve my abilities as an architect.
 
 In the end, I realized that I would probably never be more than a mediocre architect, and did not want to risk being labeled as a mediocre individual. With my leader's support. I sought and found a job on another team as a Lead Software Engineer, where I have excelled ever since.

# Bottom Line

I have worked for many companies, large and small, over the past three decades. Each has offered at least one of these types of benefits. None, however, has come close to the total experience of being a technology Cast Member at Walt Disney World. 

If I have inspired you to considering joining this amazing organization, I will direct you to the following resources. As I am writing this, we are right in the middle of the COVID-19 pandemic, and hiring is probably not a huge priority. That will not last forever, though. 

If you think you have the skills and talents to join us, we will eventually have more technology jobs open.

- To see all of our technology job openings, visit [DisneyTech.com](disneytech.com).
- For non-technology jobs, visit [DisneyCareers.com](https://jobs.disneycareers.com).
- Finally, if you are a college student, consider looking into our professional internship opportunities at [DisneyInterns.com](https://jobs.disneycareers.com/professional-internships). 
