---
layout: post
title: Walt Disney's Four Keys of Software Development
date: '2020-06-22'
author: Michael D. Callaghan
tags: 
- Careers
- Development
- Business
layout: post
feature: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/four-keys.png
thumbnail: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/four-keys.png
cover_image: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/four-keys.png
canonical_url: https://walkingriver.com/four-keys-2
published: false
---



<!--more-->

# Applying the Four Keys to Software Development
Naturally, Walt did not have software development in mind when he talked about the four keys. However, I am not an Operations Cast Member. I do not often work with Guests. I do not work in the parks, except for an occasional volunteer shift around Christmas and Easter. Because of that, it was not clear to me how I could leverage the Four Keys in my day-to-day role. As a member of a team known as the "Delivery Center of Excellence," this felt like an oversight. Our job was, as one manager put it, to be the conscience of the software delivery organizations. 

I took it upon myself to try to align some principles and practices to those four keys and come up with my own list. I share this list with you, with a warning that it is by no means exhaustive. 

## Safety
> I keep on top of and implement current secure coding practices.

Secure coding practices, PCI, PII, TLS

## Courtesy 
> Every coding decision I make is made with the end-user in mind.

SSO, Don't make the user do things twice. Smart caching, internationalization, accessibility.

## Show 
> I keep the user experience at the forefront of my application design.

Many years ago I was on a telephony system modernization project for the United States Senate. I had inherited the project when I joined the company. One of the application's features was the bulk upload of phone numbers and their physical locations into its database. The user experience for changing a single field was to download a file from the app's server, edit the record in Excel, and then upload the entire file back to the server. I am not sure who thought this was a good UX, but it worked, and most customers never complained. At least not until we installed the system at the US Senate.

The problem was one of scale. Most of our customers had a 500 - 2000 phones. The Senate had over 35,000! Let us ignore the question of why a governmental body of 100 members needs 35,000 phone numbers. The fact is that they have that many. Making a change to a single record required the steps I outline above. It was during this project that we finally got around to providing a browser-based edit page, where the user can search for and edit records one at a time if desired. There was one other problem, but I will leave that story to the next section.

As you work on your own applications, try to consider all aspects of the app's design and functionality from your users' perspective. Use common UI components, where possible. Unless you have a lot of good research in user experience, try not to create new UI paradigms. Adhere to the [Principle of Least Surprise](http://principles-wiki.net/principles:principle_of_least_surprise). Buttons should look like buttons. Components that look like links should behave like links. 

## Efficiency
> I use my time, my team's time, and the company's resources wisely.

This is the last key, but too often developers put it first. How often have you been on a project that had incredibly complex code for the simple reason than someone thought they needed to optimize something?

Continuing my US Senate story, the reason we finally provided a web page to edit individual records is because uploading their 35,000 records took our system more than three hours to process! The original request I got was to dig into the code and find out why. The result of that analysis was that each record in the spreadsheet was processed individually, with a [MySQL "upsert" command](https://www.techbeamers.com/mysql-upsert/). As you might imagine, this took considerable amount of time. 

Before attempting a fix, the customer asked whether there was an easier way to edit just a few entries. In this case, focusing on Show made more sense than focusing on Efficiency. 


# Summary

YAGNI, AHA, DRY, SOLID
