---
layout: post
title: My 3-Year Programming Hiatus (and What I Did Instead)
date: '2020-08-05'
author: Michael D. Callaghan
tags: 
- career 
- software
- real estate
feature: assets/img/house-3362676_640.jpg
thumbnail: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/house-3362676_640.jpg
cover_image: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/house-3362676_640.jpg
canonical_url: https://walkingriver.com/hiatus/
published: false
---

Ten years into an otherwise successful software development career, I experienced significant burnout and walked away from a 6-figure salary. I quit my job, sold my house, moved to a remote part of New Hampshire, and did not work again in software development for almost three years.

<!--more-->

In mid-2005 I [threw a temper tantrum and quit my high paid software development job at HP](https://walkingriver.com/net-fired). Sure, I blamed it on factors other than myself, but looking back it was all on me. Not only did I quit my job, I walked away from my entire career in software development. 

# Real Estate 

I decided to switch gears entirely and chase real estate deals full-time. Why did I think I had a "snowball's chance" in this endeavor. It was mostly due to some early successes some friends and I had over the prior year. 

_Note: As you read the following accounts, please keep in mind that many of these houses were purchased and held simultaneously. I am presenting them grouped by the individual deal, but much of what happened overlapped._

# Early Successes

About a year before I took the plunge and quit my job for real estate riches, a couple of friends and I got together and did a few deals. The first one was a straight foreclosure auction purchase.

## Traditional Foreclosure Auction

With my two partners and approximately $120,000 in cash, I attended a real estate foreclosure auction. One of my partners had been in touch with the absentee owner, who said he had no intention of stopping the sale. He wished us luck. We had agreed on an absolute maximum of $108,000 as I recall. The actual number is not as important as the fact that we had a maximum, especially because neither of the other two partners were able to attend that day.

New Hampshire foreclosures are unique in that they do not take place "on the courthouse steps" as they do in other states. Nope. NH law requires a foreclosure auction to be held _on the property being sold!_. You can imagine the spectacle this could cause, having potentially dozens of uninvited and unwelcome bidders show up unexpectedly. That is what happened to us that day.

As I mentioned, the owner did not live there. From all appearances, he had been cashing the rent checks but not paying the mortgage. His tenants, of course, had no idea. They were understandably upset when a small group of people showed up one weekday morning to sell their home out from under them. 

The attorney representing the bank explained the situation to the tenants, who grumbled a bit, but did not object too much. 

The auction was not well attended; I ended up being the only interested bidder. Everyone else there represented the bank. The auctioneer asked for an opening bid and the bank started with $90,000. I then bid $95,000. The bank went to $100,000. I went to $105,000, realizing that the bank would probably outbid me. I was right. The lawyer for the bank went to $110,000, at which point I said, "OK, it's yours." Everyone froze.

No one expected me to stop so low. There were still no other bidders but me and the bank rep, who by now seemed a little nervous. It was clear he really did not want to return with the property. He looked at me and said, somewhat sheepishly,"Seriously? You can't go any higher." I replied that I answered to partners and that we had agreed to an absolute maximum, which he had just exceeded. I thanked him and turned to go. "Wait!" he said. "What if I said "$107,000?" 

I could have been a jerk, and something about this felt "off," but I replied cooly, "I can bid $108,000 but no more." The auctioneer asked the foreclosing attorney, "Can the bank do that?" The attorney shrugged and said, "it's up to you." The auctioneer looked at me and asked, "Are you okay with this?" I said I was, to which he announced, "Sold for $108,000." 

Once the paperwork was settled and everyone else left, I knocked on the door and made a deal with the current tenant. If they agreed to leave without hassle or an eviction, I would give them $1000 for their trouble and to help them find a new place. They accepted. They were true to their word and were gone two weeks later. The house was listed with a Realtor friend the next day. My partners and I cleaned the place and touched up some paint, but otherwise did nothing to the house. We sold it a few weeks later to a newlywed couple for $150,000. 

## First Solo Deal

After that deal closed, the three of us decided to go our separate ways. We were not unhappy partnering but felt we would better each focusing on specific geographical areas near our respective houses. 

My next deal was my first solo deal. I found a single gentleman a few towns west of me who had gotten about six months behind on his mortgage payments. With legal fees piling up, he owed about $11,000 and just wanted out. He was concerned about his equity, which was quite understandable. No one wants to give up everything they have worked years to build up. Another "quirk" with New Hampshire foreclosures is that they move fast. Barring any legal challenges, it is possible to foreclose on a delinquent mortgage loan in less than 45 days. Time is not on the homeowner's side. Without going into details, we came up with a solution that allowed him time to sell and retain most of his equity. 

## A Few More Deals

Over the remainder of 2004 and into 2005, I did a few more deals on my own and managed to save up a decent nest egg, which was enough to quit my job when the time came.

# Time to Move

Once I left HP and decided I was leaving software development for good, I used some of my cash to buy a brand new home in Central New Hampshire, and then sold the home in Southern New Hampshire where I had been living. 

Once the move was complete and the other house sold, it was time to rev up the real estate machine I had been slowly building. Over the next few months I found a couple of new people to help with the tasks. One was a local real estate appraiser who was good with tools. The other was an unemployed friend from church. Both men were willing to work at no charge until after the sale of any house we bought. That alleviated any immediate cashflow issues. I still had to pay for materials, but labor was free until closing.

# Reduced Success

Unfortunately, unbeknownst to me at the time, the real estate market in New Hampshire was beginning to cool. Properties were just as easy to find and acquire but they were becoming harder to sell. Those that did sell quickly were at much lower profit margins. There were some I had to hold for months, often at burn rates of $1000 or more per month, not counting material costs. Deals profiting $20,000 or more were vanishing quickly.

## Crotched Mountain

A week before Christmas one year, I got a call from a young wife and mother. Their foreclosure auction was scheduled for the next day (Yes, six days before Christmas). Was there anything I could do? I was not confident and told her that. When I got home, I did a quick title search on the property. It was clear of any liens other than the first mortgage. However, there was very little equity to work with. I decided that if the house was pristine and needed no work, then maybe we could work something out. The bigger problem came down to timing. 

I visited her and her husband at the house the next day. It was a charming chalet type home right across the street from Crotched Mountain, a small ski area. The house was cluttered but otherwise in good shape. The thing that struck me was the complete lack of any Christmas decorations &mdash; not even a tree. I gently inquired and was told there was not much point. They assumed they would be thrown out before Christmas or New Years. Their baby's first Christmas would be remembered with no decorations and no presents.

The decision was made. We agreed to a price. I told them to buy themselves a tree and not to worry about moving until mid-January. 

When they left, they even did a pretty thorough cleaning. All I had to do was list it. It sold a few weeks later, netting very little in profit. Given all that happened, I still felt pretty good about it. 

## Bow

The next house was a lovely home in Bow, NH with a large treed lot and tremendous potential. It had an unfinished three-season porch on the back of the house with a door that dropped 12 feet or so into the back yard. There was a deck along the side without railings, which would never pass inspection. The entire house needed paint and carpet. At this point, I realized I needed to help out with the fix up. I bought a paint sprayer and arranged for all new carpet. I helped my "crew" install railings on the side deck and on the newly-built back staircase. 

When the house was complete, the thought occurred to me that I could make more money keeping it for a few years and putting a tenant in it. Against the advice of everyone I knew, that is what I did. A few months went by just fine, and then the rent checks stopped. Attempts to reach the tenants were in vain. 

After two months of being unable to reach them, they finally sent me a letter saying they had moved out and that I could keep their security deposit. I immediately got my Realtor friend over to the house for a damage assessment. She called with the good news that the house was still in good shape, but that the tenants had left the 2-car garage/barn full of their stuff.

We put the house on the market immediately, but I had to deal with the barn. New Hampshire law requires that landlords keep their tenants' property safe and secure for a minimum of 30 days after they move out. You cannot simply throw it all away. It would take longer than a month to sell, so I was not too concerned. 

After the month elapsed, we still did not have an offer on the house. Neither did the tenant come back to claim the contents of the barn. We decided to lower the asking price of the house and have a garage/barn sale. It was the first time we really took inventory of what had been left. We found a really nice snowblower and grill, along with lots of clothes and housewares. Most everything sold in one weekend. What did not we donated. 

Eventually, the house did sell. After paying my crew, the real estate fees, etc., the profit was less than $4000 for about eight months of work. You would expect that I had just learned a valuable lesson, but the harder lessons were still to come.

# Potential Disasters

I had two potential disasters, which I define as being so horrible that I almost, but did not quite, lose money on the deal.

## Hinsdale

My Realtor friend helped me find a small house in Hinsdale, NH. This is a small town on the southwest corner of the state, bordering both Massachusetts and Vermont. The house was in serious need of work, but she was confident she could sell it once the current tenant moved out. I made the purchase sight-unseen. I needed the win. Over the next month or so, my crew and I made the 200-mile roundtrip drive to the house each weekday. We had to rebuild the kitchen and the downstairs bathroom; replace the roof over the dining room and repair water damage in the dining room ceiling; and repair fire damage in the garage. The entire house was in desperate need of new carpet, so it was all replaced. 

After factoring in all of the time, effort, and cash needed to sell the house, we netted $1500 on the sale.

## Franklin

The next potential disaster was on Central Street in Franklin. The house was historic and still maintained many of its original features, including an amazing cast-iron wood stove, beautiful curved plaster walls, and custom hand-carved woodwork. We knew the numbers might be tight but the seller was cooperative and wanted out. He just needed a month or so to find a place. I agreed. Unfortunately, he was less cooperative once the house was on the market, refusing to let it be shown. He said he simply wanted to move out first, and then we could show it. Not long after he left, I got a call from another real estate agent informing me the basement had about a foot of water. Apparently the sump pump had failed during a heavy rain and water was coming in the through the basement door. 

I rented a commercial water pump from Taylor Rental and headed out into the dark and stormy night. When I arrived, I discovered that the sump pump was fine. It had simply tripped the circuit breaker. Yes, that means there might have been a short in the pump, and I might have stepped into a pool of electrically charged water and electrocuted myself. Fortunately, that did not happen. I got both pumps working and the basement mostly free of water, and then went home.

The next day I told my agent to sell it at any price. She ended up bringing me an offer that let me break even.

# Complete Disasters

My track record since leaving HP was not the success story I had envisioned. I had not yet lost money but was quickly burning through my savings. I was simply not earning enough money fast enough to pay my bills. And then I was hit with two complete disasters in rapid succession.

## Jaffrey

I got a call from a tenant near the base of Mt. Monadnock in Jaffrey, NH. Her landlord was about to lose the house to foreclosure and was willing to sell quickly. She wanted to buy it, but needed time to get the money before the auction. The house was a tiny but clean manufactured home on a huge, gorgeous lot with mountain views. I agreed to purchase it from the landlord and arrange a sale to the tenant. 

Once I took possession of the property, it became quickly apparent why the owner was having trouble making his payments. The tenants were not paying rent and apparently had no intention to do so. After a few months of promises, they finally admitted that they would never be able to buy the place. I politely told them they would need to leave, then, so I could get it sold. I was happy letting them stay while they were trying to buy it, but I was not looking to be a long-term landlord. They agreed to go without a legal battle.

A few weeks later I received a phone call from the Town of Jaffrey. The house's water use had doubled over the past month, which they thought was unusual. They sent an inspector to the house, who heard running water through the door. Not getting an answer at the door, he immediately shut off the water and called me. 

When I got to the house, I discovered that the tenants had left without telling me. They had also shut off the power, and thus the heat. This being the dead of winter in New Hampshire, the temperature tends to drop well below freezing. I entered the house to a disaster. One of the water supply lines had frozen and burst, and began filling the house with water. By the time I arrived, the water was gone. The water stains, on the other hand, were approximately 18 inches above the floor. The floor itself was gone in many places, having simply collapsed under the weight of so much water. The entire house was rendered uninhabitable. 

When I purchased it a few months prior, its value was estimated around $200,000. I sold it a few months later for $88,000 to a builder who intended to tear it all out and build a new home on the lot. This was my first complete disaster. 

## Concord

While I was dealing with the tenant fiasco in Jaffrey, another one was brewing in the state capital, Concord. I bought a tiny fixer-upper on the outskirts of the city, too close to the highway to be convenient but far enough to be quiet and pleasant. It was easily the worst-looking house on its short street. It was also more than 100 years old and it showed. The yard was pleasant and I felt it would make a nice starter home for a young family. We got to work repairing one bathroom and replacing the other. A new member of my crew decided that he would live in the house while repairs were made. 

We tore out the old carpet to find beautiful hardwood floors beneath. They were in rough shape, but I found a local refinisher to restore them for just a few hundred dollars.

Next, we tore the rotting walls from the front porch, which someone decided should be a 3-season room. We managed to salvage the roof, but the railings and decking all needed to be replaced.

The only thing worth saving in the kitchen were the cabinets, which will become important shortly. 

Once the house was liveable again, we immediately put it on the market at its estimated value of $225,000. By this time, the market had taken a dangerous turn for the worst. Nothing seemed to be moving. After a few false starts, I reluctantly agreed to rent the house for a year, hoping the market would turn and I could sell. Or perhaps hoping that the tenant would be able to buy it. I was fine either way.

A few months later, you can probably guess what happened. The rent check bounced. I had gotten into the habit of cashing my tenants' rent checks at the bank on which they were drawn, wherever possible. This enabled me to avoid bounced check fees because I never actually deposited them. On this particular day, I went to the local bank branch and was told there was not enough money in the account to cover the check. 

This tenant and I were on pretty good terms, so I emailed her to ask her what was going on. I heard nothing for about a week. Finally, she replied with an apology. She could no longer afford to stay and had moved out. 

When I got to the house, I found that the locks had been changed. Having summoned a locksmith and the local police department to help me enter my own property, we waited for them to arrive. What we discovered upon entering was nothing like I would have ever imagined. My kitchen was gone. Every appliance, cabinet, and counter top &mdash; gone, stolen. The rest of the house was destroyed. There were holes in the walls, obscene graffiti scrawled everywhere. The pristine hardwood floors were scuffed and scratched. The bathroom we had replaced was trashed. One of the bedroom walls had been used to hang a dartboard. You could see the outline where the board had been and the evidence of how badly they played.

I immediately asked the Concord police officer whether I could file a criminal complaint, for the kitchen theft if not outright vandalism. He replied that because my tenant had done it, it was not a criminal matter and that I would have to file a civil complaint. 

I was out of money and my insurance would not cover this type of damage. In desperation, I had my real estate agent put the house on the market as-is, as a "gut job" fixer. She managed to find a buyer willing to pay $80,000 for it. I accepted.

# Recovery Begins

These are not the only deals I did but is a good representation of my experience over a three year period. The house in Concord was my last. By that point, not only were my savings gone, but I was in the hole more than $200,000. 

I remember having a conversation with a friend from high school while much of this was happening. He asked me how my real estate experiment was going, and I unloaded on him with everything that had occurred. It was at that point he said something that has stuck with me ever since. "I know you really wanted to give this real estate thing a go, but have you considered that this isn't your core competency?" He went on to remind me that ever since we met I had a love for computer programming and that I was really good at it. 

He offered me a part-time software development gig with his young firm, working remotely on a 9-1-1 product. I gratefully accepted the contract, which turned into a full-time job a few months later. This led to future opportunities working on telephony projects for other companies, including one in which I was a minority shareholder. The experience I gained there enabled me to get a long-term contract with Dell in Round Rock, Texas, and ultimately my current job at Walt Disney World. These other roles and jobs may become future blog posts. 

# Lessons Learned

It took me from 2008 to 2011 before I finally got out from under the disaster that was my real estate career. Most of those losses, along with some I have not touched on, were personal losses in cash, home equity, and even some retirement money. Though I was never forced into bankruptcy and my credit has recovered, I still feel the loss to this day. I have not speculated on real estate since.

Some of the takeaways from this experience:

- Never risk more than you can stand to lose. I leveraged one property against another on more than one occasion. This led to a domino effect where a loss on one deal led directly to a loss on the next, and so on. 
- You make your money when you buy. Never assume the real estate market is always going up. Though it is true that long time horizons can sometimes bail you out of a mistake, there are still some areas that have not yet recovered. The current estimated value of that house in Concord is $265,000, fully renovated and 12 years later.
- Rental property management is hard. Hire a professional property manager. Let them do their job. 

Finally, the most valuable lesson I learned came from my friend: Stick to your core competencies. It is one thing to make the occasional "small bet" where your downside is limited. That is not what I did.

I let my pride and my emotions drive me away from what could have been a long and lucrative career with HP. I lost tens of thousands of dollars, destroyed my personal credit for years, and nearly threw away my career. Three years in the software industry is an eternity. I was fortunate to have been rescued by someone willing to take a chance on me after being away for so long. I will be ever grateful.

Burn out is real. Every software developer I have ever met has felt it at one time or another. Let my experience be a warning to you not to throw away a promising career on a long-shot. 

I often wonder what would have happened had I simply continued to partner with my two friends on two or three deals per year, as we did with our first one. It possibly could have turned into a profitable side gig for all of us. Now I will never know.
