---
layout: post
title: Finding Your "Why" 
date: '2019-12-09'
author: Michael D. Callaghan
tags: 
- career 
- motivation
- development
layout: post
feature: assets/img/why.png
thumbnail: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/why.png
cover_image: https://walkingriver.com/assets/img/why.png
canonical_url: https://walkingriver.com/why/
published: false
---

Why? Everyone struggles with this question from time to time.  Why are we learning these technologies? Why not just stick with what we know and are comfortable with? Why do I do what I do? Is it for the money? Is it for pride? I think many developers fall into one of two mindsets: The ones who are excited by the "new and shiny" thing; and the ones who find comfort in the familiar. Neither attitude is right or wrong. The question got me thinking, though, about why a company would spend precious resources (money) to train another its developers on a new technology.

<!--more-->

The [Economist Dr. Thomas Sowell](https://tsowell.com/) has said, "There are no solutions; there are only trade-offs." What he meant by that is no single solution is going to work for every situation, as there are always trade-offs in what is gained versus what is lost. Whatever you do today, you do at the expense of something else you could be doing instead. Knowing your "why" will help you make those trade-offs.

# Some Background
Early in my career, my why was simple. I loved to program computers. I started learning BASIC in High School in 1981. After graduation, I would have gladly worked for free. I enjoyed it that much.

I did not go into professional software development right away, however. In 1985 I started my freshman year at the University of Maryland as a Computer Science major. It did not go well. Although talented in programming, the higher math eluded me. I got a zero on my first Calculus 3 exam. After multiple attempts over about four years, I decided to leave school and give up on programming as a career. I still loved programming, but did not see a career path without a degree.

# Junior C Programmer
After dropping out of school, I spent a lot of my time in various entrepreneurial pursuits, and worked for a few years delivering pizzas. Fast forward a few years to 1995, I eventually found myself living in Nashua, New Hampshire. I moved there specifically to take a retail job working for Computer Town, an Authorized Apple dealer. Yes, I was a Mac user before it was cool. I owned an early [Macintosh II](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Macintosh_II) and even ran [A/UX](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A/UX) for a time. As you can see, I was still a computer geek at heart.

I was also married, and we were expecting our first child. I was starting to get a glimpse of my first why.

One day while scrolling through ne.jobs, a [usenet newsfeed](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usenet#ISPs,_news_servers,_and_newsfeeds), I found a post by a local company looking for a Junior C Programmer. Heck, I learned C in my failed college attempt, and I was pretty good at it. It occurred to me that the worst outcome would be that they would not hire me,  I applied. To my surprise, they hired me. The downside was that it would be an approximately $10,000/year reduction in pay. As Dr. Sowell said, "no solutions; only trade-offs." The trade-off here seemed to be a reduction in income in the short term, versus potentially greater future advancement. After all, how many advancement opportunities would there be in a small retail company? Caring for a small but growing family is a unique motivator. We decided to accept the lower pay, for now, in the hope that the role would open up additional opportunities. 

# Macintosh Programmer
Shortly after my son was born, I happened to run into one of my former customers from Computer Town. He ran a small Macintosh development shop doing contract work. He told me he had always thought I would probably be a good fit for his team, but hesitated because I had no paid programming experience. Now I did. We scheduled a lunch for a few days out, and he eventually offered me a job with his firm.

A few years into this job, I ran into a moral dilemma. 
---

